3	Understand Terraform basics
3a	Install and version Terraform providers
3b	Describe plugin-based architecture
3c	Write Terraform configuration using multiple providers
3d	Describe how Terraform finds and fetches providers

# Providers
# Provider and Modules are Plugins
Provider
A provider is a plugin that is a mapping to a
Cloud Service Provider (CSPS) API.

Module
A module is a group of configuration files that
provide common configuration functionality.

> terraform providers
use Alias to use alternate provider
provider "aws" {
    alias = "west"
    region = "us-west-2"
}
resource "aws_instance" "web" {
    provider = aws.west
}
https://registry.terraform.io/

Providers are Terraform Plugins that allow you to interactive with:
Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) eg. AWS, Azure, GCP
• Software as a Service (SaaS) Providers eg. Github, Angolia, Stripe
Other APIs eg. Kubernetes, Postgres


> Providers are distributed separately from Terraform and the plugins must be downloaded before use.
terraform init will download the necessary provider plugins listed in a Terraform configuration file.


Providers come in three tiers:
> Official
— Published by the company that owns the provider technology or service
> Verified
— actively maintained, up-to-date and compatible with both Terraform and Provider
> Community 
— published by a community member but no guarantee of maintenance, up-to-date or compatibility


provider "github" {}

resource "github_repository" "repo" {
    name = "terraformRepo"
    description = "my first resource with terraform"
    visibility = "public"
    auto_init = "true" #readme_file
}


> terraform providers
devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/1-github$ terraform providers

Providers required by configuration:
.
└── provider[registry.terraform.io/hashicorp/github]





> terraform.tfstate
terraform creates terraform.tfstate file with complete information of created resources.
whenever we run another terraform apply/destroy command, it takes backup of tfstate file, and create a new tfstate file in its place with new configuration
> terraform show
shows tfstate file in terminal
> terraform refresh
manually edit description of repo on github
terraform.tfstate file still shows the same description

"description": "my first resource with terraform manually edited",

run ->terraform refresh

now terraform.tfstate will show....
"description": "my first resource with terraform manually edited",
> now if you run terraform plan
there will be a drift
resource is manually changed on github
and in our terraform.tf file, description is still old. so, if you run terraform apply command now, it will update the online github repo according to our tf file 

> terraform output
resource "github_repository" "repo" {
    name = "terraformRepo"
    description = "my first resource with terraform"
    visibility = "public"
    auto_init = "true" #readme_file
}
output "repoURL" {
    value = github_repository.repo.html_url
}
for value, go to terraform docs, Attribute Reference

> terraform console
devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/2-github$ terraform console
    > var.city
    "kanpur"
    > var.age
    23
    > github_repository.repo.html_url
    "https://github.com/azamsajjad/terraformRepo"
    > github_repository.repo.sshclone_url
    ╷
    │ Error: Unsupported attribute
    │
    │   on <console-input> line 1:
    │   (source code not available)
    │
    │ This object has no argument, nested block, or exported
    │ attribute named "sshclone_url". Did you mean "ssh_clone_url"?
    ╵


    > github_repository.repo.ssh_clone_url
    "git@github.com:azamsajjad/terraformRepo.git"
    > exit

> terraform fmt
fixes bad indentation
devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/2-github$ terraform validate
Success! The configuration is valid.

devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/2-github$ terraform fmt
provider.tf
terraform.tf
terraform.tfvars
variables.tf

> terraform taint aws_security_group.allow_tls
it tells terraform that whenever next time we run terraform apply, replace this resource. create a new one, and delete this damaged resource

however, terraform [doesnot/recommend] you to run this command, instead ask you to run 
terraform apply --replace
-----------------------------------------------
# Provisioners
You can use provisioners to model specific actions on the local machine or on a remote machine in order to prepare servers or other infrastructure objects for service.
>Passing data into virtual machines and other compute resources
When deploying virtual machines or other similar compute resources, we often need to pass in data about other related infrastructure that the software on that server will need to do its job.

The various provisioners that interact with remote servers over SSH or WinRM can potentially be used to pass such data by logging in to the server and providing it directly, but most cloud computing platforms provide mechanisms to pass data to instances at the time of their creation such that the data is immediately available on system boot. For example:

- Alibaba Cloud: user_data on alicloud_instance or alicloud_launch_template.
- Amazon EC2: user_data or user_data_base64 on aws_instance, aws_launch_template, and aws_launch_configuration.
- Amazon Lightsail: user_data on aws_lightsail_instance.
- Microsoft Azure: custom_data on azurerm_virtual_machine or azurerm_virtual_machine_scale_set.
- Google Cloud Platform: metadata on google_compute_instance or google_compute_instance_group.

>if terraform fails at provisioning a script, it marks the resource as tainted and it will recreate in next run of terraform apply

# file, local-exec, remote-exec
  provisioner "file" {
    source = "readme.md" #terraform machine
    destination = "/tmp/readme.md" #remote machine
    connection {
      type = ssh
      user = ubuntu
      private_key = file("${path.module}/id_rsa")
      host = "${self.public_ip}"
      # why self? because terraform cannot use aws_instance before creating it, it will be stuck in an infinite loop if we specify aws_instance.web.public_ip
    }
# WHY TERRAFORM DONT RECOMMEND PROVISIONERS,
# BECAUSE IT IS NOT IDEMPOTENT
# IT CANNOT DETECT CHANGES TO SCRIPTS
# LIKE ANSIBLE CAN

---------------------------------------------
> terraform.tf
you work as a team, so you can specify the version of terraform and providers your configuration works in in a terraform.tf file. so all your team-members know what version to use
-> terraform version
~~~json
terraform {
  required_version = "1.6.6" <-NEVER USE VARIABLE HERE>
  required_providers {
    aws = {
      source  = "hashicorp/aws"
      version = "5.31.0"
    }
  }}
~~~
-----------------------------------------------
> Data Source: aws_ami
Use this data source to get the ID of a registered AMI for use in other resources.

Data_sources are available in the registry for every resource, so you can specify filters that fetch you the latest aws version of that resource, e.g. ec2 ami image
~~~json
data "aws_ami" "ubuntu" {
  most_recent = true
  owners      = ["${var.owner_name}"]
  filter {
    name   = "name"
    values = ["${var.image_name}"]
  }

  filter {
    name   = "root-device-type"
    values = ["ebs"]
  }
  filter {
    name   = "virtualization-type"
    values = ["hvm"]
  }
}

output "ami_id" {
  value = data.aws_ami.ubuntu.id
}
~~~

Changes to Outputs:
  + ami_id               = "ami-0c7217cdde317cfec"

------------------------------------------------
> terraform graph
devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/3-ec2aws$ terraform graph | dot -Tpdf > graph.pdf

> terraform workspace
~~~bash
devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/3-ec2aws$ terraform workspace new dev
    Created and switched to workspace "dev"!

    You're now on a new, empty workspace. Workspaces isolate their state,
    so if you run "terraform plan" Terraform will not see any existing state
    for this configuration.
devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/3-ec2aws$ terraform workspace new prod
Created and switched to workspace "prod"!

You're now on a new, empty workspace. Workspaces isolate their state,
so if you run "terraform plan" Terraform will not see any existing state
for this configuration.
devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/3-ec2aws$ terraform workdpace sh
ow
Terraform has no command named "workdpace". Did you mean "workspace"?

To see all of Terraform's top-level commands, run:
  terraform -help

devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/3-ec2aws$ terraform workspace sh
ow
prod
devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/3-ec2aws$ terraform workspace list
  default
  dev
* prod

devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/3-ec2aws$ terraform workspace select dev
Switched to workspace "dev".
then...

terraform apply --var-file=dev-terraform.tfvars
~~~
> terraform apply --var-file=dev-terraform.tfvars
this way, every environment will have its own tfstate file

you cannot delete default ns or active ns

--------------------------------------------



