# Debugging Kubernetes nodes with crictl
FEATURE STATE: Kubernetes v1.11 [stable]
crictl is a command-line interface for CRI-compatible container runtimes. You can use it to inspect and debug container runtimes and applications on a Kubernetes node. crictl and its source are hosted in the cri-tools repository.

Before you begin
crictl requires a Linux operating system with a CRI runtime.

Installing crictl
You can download a compressed archive crictl from the cri-tools release page, for several different architectures. Download the version that corresponds to your version of Kubernetes. Extract it and move it to a location on your system path, such as /usr/local/bin/.

VERSION="v1.26.0" # check latest version in /releases page
wget https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools/releases/download/$VERSION/crictl-$VERSION-linux-amd64.tar.gz
sudo tar zxvf crictl-$VERSION-linux-amd64.tar.gz -C /usr/local/bin
rm -f crictl-$VERSION-linux-amd64.tar.gz


List pods by label:

crictl pods --label run=nginx

# Troubleshooting
Try to use imperative commands only for all below scenarios 

POD Scenarios

1) create a pod named redis using image radis:alpha

2) create a pod using image tomcat & assign label app with value web 

3) create a pod named kual203 using image lerndevops/alpine:beta, find the errors in the logs, write the error messages to a file /opt/kual203.txt

4) Deploy a messaging pod using the redis:alpine image with the labels set to tier=msg & app=web

5) list all the pods with label app=web & write the output to a file /opt/webpods.txt

6) deploy pod using https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lerndevops/educka/master/exam-prep/app-redis.yml 
   if there are any errors try to fix them and ensure the pod status is running. DO NOT delete the pod. 
   
7) Create a POD in the finance namespace named red-bus with the image redis:alpine

8) deploy a pod with forex name using lerndevops/tomcat:8.5.3 in finance namespace with label env=qa

9) list all pods with running status in finance namespace and write the output to /opt/kufinpods.txt

10) deploy a pod named envpod using image nginx & apply env variables username=dbuser password=dbpass

11) deploy a pod named dbpod using image lerndevops/alpine:sleep with label app=testapp, env variable uname=appuser & set the restart policy to never

12) genereate pod definition file with pod named apppod with application contianers using nginx,tomcat,redis then save the definition file to /opt/apppod.yml. then deploy the pod & ensure it is running state. 

## Log locations to check:

/var/log/pods <---------------------priority 2---------------->
/var/log/containers
crictl ps + crictl logs <---------------------priority 3---------------->
docker ps + docker logs (in case when Docker is used)
kubelet logs: /var/log/syslog or journalctl     <--------------priority 1---------------->

# always make a backup !
cp /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-apiserver.yaml ~/kube-apiserver.yaml.ori

# make the change
vim /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-apiserver.yaml

# wait till container restarts
watch crictl ps

# check for apiserver pod
k -n kube-system get pod



<----------------------scenario----------------------------->
There is a Deployment in Namespace application1 which seems to have issues and is not getting ready.

Fix it by only editing the Deployment itself and no other resources.


Tip

k -n application1 get deploy

k -n application1 logs deploy/api

k -n application1 describe deploy api

k -n application1 get cm
It looks like a wrong ConfigMap name was used, let's change it


k -n application1 edit deploy api

spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
      - env:
        - name: CATEGORY
          valueFrom:
            configMapKeyRef:
              key: category
              name: configmap-category

controlplane $ kubectl -n application1 get cm
NAME                 DATA   AGE
configmap-category   1      7m31s
kube-root-ca.crt     1      7m31s
<------------------------------------------------------------>