Exam objectives
1	Understand infrastructure as code (IaC) concepts
1a	Explain what IaC is
1b	Describe advantages of IaC patterns

2	Understand the purpose of Terraform (vs other IaC)
2a	Explain multi-cloud and provider-agnostic benefits
2b	Explain the benefits of state

3 6.1-commands

4	Use Terraform outside of core workflow
4a	Describe when to use terraform import to import existing infrastructure into your Terraform state
4b	Use terraform state to view Terraform state
4c	Describe when to enable verbose logging and what the outcome/value is
----------------------------------------
----------------------------------------
----------------------------------------
## HashiCorp is a company specializing in managed open-source tools used to support the development and deployment of large-scale service-oriented
software installations
What is HashiCorp Cloud Platform (HCP)?
HCP is a unified platform to access Hashicorp various products.
HCP services are cloud agnostic
• support for the main cloud service providers (CSPs)
• eg. AWS, GCP and Azure
highly suited for multi-cloud workloads

> Boundary
secure remote access to systems based on trusted identity.
> Consul
service discovery platform. provides a full-featured service mesh for secure service segmentation across any cloud or runtime environment, and distributed key-value storage for application configuration
> Nomad
scheduling and deployment of tasks across worker nodes in a cluster
> Packer
tool for building virtual-machine images for later deployment.
> Terraform
infrastructure as code software which enables provisioning and adapting
virtual infrastructure across all major cloud provider
> Terraform Cloud — 
a place to storage and manage lac in the cloud or with teams
Terraform Cloud is a Software as Service (SaaS) offering for:
• Remote state storage
• Version Control integrations
  Flexible workflows
• Collaborate on Infrastructure changes
in a single unified web portal.
> Vagrant
Building and maintenance of reproducible software-
development environments via virtualization technology
> Vault
secrets management, identity-based access, encrypting
application data and auditing of secrets for applications,
systems, and users
> Waypoint
modern workflow to build, deploy, and release across platforms
----------------------------------------
# IaaC
>Provisioning
To prepare a server with systems, data and software, and make it ready for network operation.
Using Configuration Management tools like Puppet, Ansible, Chef, Bash scripts, PowerShell or
Cloud-Init you can provision a server.
When you launch a cloud service and configure it you are "provisioning"

>Deployment
Deployment is the act of delivering a version of your application to run a provisioned server.
Deployment could be performed via AWS CodePipline, Harness, Jenkins, Github Actions, CircleCl

>Orchestration
Orchestration is the act of coordinating multiple systems or services.
Orchestration is a common term when working with microservices, Containers and Kubernetes.
Orchestration could be Kubernetes, Salt, Fabric



----------------------------------------
>Mutable Infrastructure
Develop -> Deploy -> Configure (ansible)
A Virtual Machine (VM) is deployed and
then a Configuration Management tool like
Ansible, Puppet, Chef, Salt or Cloud-Init is
used to configure the state of the server

>Immutable Infrastructure with Packer
A VM is launched and provisioned, and
then and it is turned into a Virtual Image,
stored in image repository, that image is
used to deployed VM instances
----------------------------------------
> What is Change Management?
A standard approach to apply change, and resolving conflicts brought about by change.
In the context of Infrastructure as Code (laC), Change management is the procedure that will be followed when resources are modify and applied via configuration script.
> What is Change Automation?
a way of automatically creating a consistent, systematic, and
predictable way of managing change request via controls and policies
Terraform uses Change Automation in the form of Execution Plans and Resources graphs to apply and review complex changesets
> What is a ChangeSet?
A collection of commits that represent changes made to
a versioning repository. laac uses ChangeSets so you can
see what has changed by who over time.

----------------------------------------
----------------------------------------
----------------------------------------
# Terraform Installation
wget -O- https://apt.releases.hashicorp.com/gpg | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /usr/share/keyrings/hashicorp-archive-keyring.gpg
echo "deb [signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/hashicorp-archive-keyring.gpg] https://apt.releases.hashicorp.com $(lsb_release -cs) main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/hashicorp.list
sudo apt update && sudo apt install terraform

----------------------------------------
# Terraform Language
HashiCorp Configuration Files (aka Terraform files) contain the configuration information about providers and resources.
> Terraform files end in the extension of .tf or either .tf.json
Terraform files are written in the Terraform Language
> .tf.json syntax is useful when generating portions of a configuration programmatically, since existing JSON libraries can be used to prepare the generated configuration files.
Terraform language consists of only a few basic elements:

• Blocks — containers for other content, represent an object
           block type — can have zero or more labels and a body
           block label — name of a block
• Arguments — assign a value to a name
              They appear within blocks
• Expressions — represent a value, either literally or by referencing and combining other values They appear as values for arguments, or within other expressions.

resource "aws_vpc" "main" {
        cidr_block = var.base_cidr_block
}
<Block TYPE> "<BLOCK LABEL>" "<BLOCK LABEL>" {
        <IDENTIFIER> = <EXPRESSION> #Arguement
}
You might come across HashiCorp Configuration Language (HCL) this is the low-level language for both the Terraform Language and alternative JSON syntax

# HCL
HCL is an open-source toolkit for creating structured configuration languages that are both human and machine friendly, for use with command-line tools
> github.com/hashicorp/hclHCL is an open-source toolkit for creating structured configuration languages that are both human and machine friendly, for use with command-line tools
github.com/hashicorp/hcl
> products that use HCL
Terraform Language (.tf)
Packer Template (.pkr.hcl)
Vault Policies (no extension)
Boundary Controllers and Workers (.hcl)
Consul Configuration (.hcl)
Waypoint Application Configuration(.hcl)
Nomad Job Specifications (.nomad)
shipyard Blueprint (.hcl)
Sentinel Policies Xdoesnot use HCL, but its own ACL custom language
----------------------------------------
# Terraform Lifecycle
Code -> init -> plan -> validate -> apply -> destroy/code

Terraform is logically split into two main parts:

> Terraform Core
• Terraform Core is a statically-compiled binary written in Go
• use remote procedure calls (RPC) to communicate wth Terraform Plugins
> Terraform Plugins
• expose an implementation for a specific service, or provisioner
----------------------------------------
www.terraform-best-practices.com
----------------------------------------
# Terraform Provisioners install software, edit files, and
provision machines created with Terraform
Terraform allows you to work with two different provisioners:
> cloud-init e.g. user-data in aws
Cloud-Init is an industry standard for cross-platform
cloud instance initializations. When you launch a VM
on a Cloud Service Provider (CSP) you'll provide a
YAML or Bash script.
> Packer
Packer is an automated image-builder service.
You provide a configuration file to create and
provision the machine image and the image is
the delivered to a repository for use.
----------------------------------------
# Terraform Settings
The special terraform configuration block type eg. terraform { ... }
is used to configure some behaviors of Terraform itself
In Terraform settings we can specify:

• required_version
The expected version of terraform
• required_providers
The providers that will be pull during an
terraform init
• experiments
Experimental language features, that the
community can try and provide feedback
• provider_meta
module-specific information for providers

terraform {
        required_providers {
                aws = {
                        version = ">=2.7.0"
                        source = "hashicorp/aws"
                }
        }
}
----------------------------------------

# Terraform Ignore File

When executing a remote plan or apply in a CLI-driven run,
an archive of your configuration directory is uploaded to Terraform Cloud.

You can define paths to ignore from upload via a 
`.terraformignore` file at the root of your configuration directory.
If this file is not present, the archive will exclude the following `by default`:
.git/ directories
.terraform/ directories (exclusive of .terraform/modules)

.terraformignore works just like a .gitignore with the only difference is that you cannot have multiple
.terraformignore files in subdirectories. Only the the file in the root directory will be read
----------------------------------------
----------------------------------------

----------------------------------------
----------------------------------------









----------------------------------------



