# Introduction to Terraform Expressions

Expressions are used to refer to or compute  values within a configuration.


## Types and Values
## Strings and Templates
## References to Values
## Operators
## Conditional Expressions
## For Expressions
## Splat Expressions
## Dynamic Blocks
## Version Constraints
## Function Calls
## Type Constraints


## Types and Values
The result of an expression is a value. All values have a type
> string  ami = "ami-21ef3r"
> number  size = 6.27445
> bool    termination_protection = true

No Type:
> null   endpoint = null
null represents absence or omission
when you want to use the underlying default of a
provider's resource configuration option

> list (tuple)   regions = ["us-east-1a", "us-east-1b"]
> map (object)   tags = {env = "Production", priority = 3}

## Strings and Templates
when quoting strings, you use double quotes ""
Double quoted strings can interpret escape sequences.
\n      newline
\r      carriage return
\t      tab
\"      literal quote (without terminating the string)
\\      literal backlash
\uNNNN  Unicode character from the basic multilingual plane
\UNNNNNNNN  Unicode character from supplementary planes

special escape sequences:
dollardollar{     Literal ${, without beginning an interpolation sequence.
}}
percentpercent{   Literal %{, without beginning a template directive sequence.
}}


Terraform also supports a "heredoc" style.
Heredoc is a UNIX style multi-line string:
<<EOT
Hello
world
EOT

or 

<<-EOT
    ignore
    tabs
    too
EOT

<<REASON
not mendatory to write EOT
ok
anything capital
REASON

> String interpolation allows you to evaluate an expression
between the markers eg. ${....} and coverts it to a string.
"Hello, ${var.name}!"

> String directive allows you to evaluate an
conditional logic between the markers eg. %{ .... }
"Hello, %{ if var.name != "" }${var.name}%{ else }unnamed%{ endif }!

You can use interpolation or
directives within a HEREDOC
<<EOT
%{ for ip in aws_instance.example.*.private_ip }
server ${ip}
%{ endfor }
EOT

You can stripe whitespacing that would
normally be left by directive blocks by
providing a trailing tilde eg.
<<EOT
%{ for ip in aws_instance.example.*.private_ip ~}
server ${ip}
%{ endfor ~}
EOT
## Operators
Operators are mathematical operations you can
preform to numbers within expressions

a * b     Multiplication
a / b     Division
a % b     Modulus
a + b     Addition
a - b     Subtraction
-a        Flip to Negative ( * -1)
a == b    Equals
a != b    Does not Equal
a < b     Less Than
a <= b    Less Then or Equal
a > b     Greater Then
a >= b    Greater Then or Equal
a || b    Or
a && b    And
!a        Flip Boolean

## Conditional Expressions
> only way to do ifelse statements in Terraform
Terraform support ternary if else conditions.
    1           2       3           ternary
condition?true_val:false_val

var.a != "" ? var.a : "default-a"
The return type for it the if and else must be the same type:
var.example ? tostring(12) : "hello"

## For Expressions
For expressions allows you to iterative over a complex type and apply transformations
A for expression can accept as input a list, a set, a tuple, a map, or an object.
> list
[ for s in var.list : upper(s)]
Uppercase each string in the provided list
> map
[ for k, v in var.map : length(k) + length(v)]
For map you can get: Key and value
> index
[ for i, v in var.list : "${i} is ${v}]
for a list, you can get the index
> []
[ for s in var.list : upper(s)]
square brackets [] returns a tuple
> if
[for s in var.list : upper(s) if s != ""]
An if statement can be used in a for expression to
filter / reduce the amount of elements returned.
- Implicit Element Ordering on Conversion
Since Terraform can convert a unordered type (maps objects and sets) to a ordered type (list and tuples) it will need to choose an implied ordering.
Maps and Objects — stored by key A-Z
• Sets of Strings — stored by string A-Z
• Everything else — arbitrary ordering



> main.tf
terraform {

}

variable "worlds" {
    type = list
}

variable "worlds_map" {
    type = map
}
> terraform.tfvars
worlds=["jasoom", "sasoom", "casoom", "barsoom"]
worlds_map={
    "jasoom" = "mars",
    "sasoom" = "earth",
    "casoom" = "jupiter",
    "barsoom" = "venus"
}


~~~sh
devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/6-console$ terraform console
> [for w in var.worlds : upper(w)]
[
  "JASOOM",
  "SASOOM",
  "CASOOM",
  "BARSOOM",
]
> i is the index, w is the variable
> [for i,w in var.worlds : upper(i)]
[
  "0",
  "1",
  "2",
  "3",
]
> [for i,w in var.worlds : upper(w)]
[
  "JASOOM",
  "SASOOM",
  "CASOOM",
  "BARSOOM",
]
> [] is going to give you a list, {} map
> {for i,w in var.worlds : "${i}" => upper(w)}
{
  "0" = "JASOOM"
  "1" = "SASOOM"
  "2" = "CASOOM"
  "3" = "BARSOOM"
}


> k is key, v is value
devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/6-console$ terraform console
> [for k,v in var.worlds_map : upper(k)]
[
  "BARSOOM",
  "CASOOM",
  "JASOOM",
  "SASOOM",
]
> [for k,v in var.worlds_map : upper(v)]
[
  "VENUS",
  "JUPITER",
  "MARS",
  "EARTH",
]
> [for k,v in var.worlds_map : upper(k) if v == "mars" ]
[
  "JASOOM",
]
> [for k,v in var.worlds_map : upper(k) if v != "mars" ]
[
  "BARSOOM",
  "CASOOM",
  "SASOOM",
]
~~~



## Splat Expressions
A splat expression provides a shorter expression for for expressions
What is a splat operator?
A splat operator is represented by an asterisk (*), it originates from the ruby language Splats in Terraform are used to rollup or soak up a bunch of iterations in afor expression
> for lists, sets and tuples
[for o in var.list : o.id]
[ for o in var.list : o.interface[0].name]
> can be written as
var.list[*].id
var.list[*].interfaces[0].name
If the value is anything other than a null value then the splat expression will transform it into a single-element list
If the value is null then the splat expression will return an empty tuple.


devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/6-console$ terraform console
> var.worlds_splat
tolist([
  {
    "earths_name" = "venus"
    "mars_name" = "barsoom"
  },
  {
    "earths_name" = "jupiter"
    "mars_name" = "casoom"
  },
  {
    "earths_name" = "earth"
    "mars_name" = "sasoom"
  },
  {
    "earths_name" = "mars"
    "mars_name" = "jasoom"
  },
])
> [for m in var.worlds_splat : m.mars_name]
[
  "barsoom",
  "casoom",
  "sasoom",
  "jasoom",
]
> [for m in var.worlds_splat : m.earths_name]
[
  "venus",
  "jupiter",
  "earth",
  "mars",
]
---------------------------OR-------------
-----------------USE_SPLATS_______________
> var.worlds_splat[*].mars_name
tolist([
  "barsoom",
  "casoom",
  "sasoom",
  "jasoom",
])
> var.worlds_splat[*].earths_name
tolist([
  "venus",
  "jupiter",
  "earth",
  "mars",
])



## Dynamic Blocks
Dynamic blocks allows you dynamically construct repeatable nested blocks
~~~json

locals {
    ingress_rules = [{
        port = 443
        description = "Port 443"
    },
    {
        port = 80
        description = "Port 80"
    }]
}
resource "aws_security_group" "main" {
    name = "sg"
    vpc_id = data.aws_vpc.main.id

    dynamic "ingress" {
        for_each = local.ingress_rules
        content {
            description = ingress.value.description
            from_port = ingress.value.port
            to_port = ingress.value.port
            protocol = "tcp"
            cidr_blocks = ["0.0.0.0/0"]
        }
    }
}


~~~

## Version Constraints
Terraform utilizes Semantic Versioning for specifying Terraform, Providers and Modules versions

Semantic Versioning is open-standard on
how to define versioning for software
management e.g. MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH
2.0.0
1.0.0-beta -> 0-beta is patch

1.MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes,
2.MlNOR version when you add functionality in a backwards compatible manner, and
3.PATCH version when you make backwards compatible bug fixes.

A version constraint is a string containing one or more conditions, separated by commas.
• = or no operator. Match exact version number e.g. "1.0.0", "=1.0.0"
• !=  Excludes an exact version number e.g. "!=1.O.O"
• > >= < <= Compare against a specific version e.g. ">=1.0.0"
• ~> Allow only the rightmost version (last number) to increment e.g. 
  "~>1.0.0"

## Progressive Versioning
Progressive Versioning is the practice of using the latest version to keep a proactive stance of security, modernity and development agility

also called "Practicing Good Hygiene"

By being up to date you are pushing left things you will need to fix to stay compatible.
You will have to deal with smaller problems instead of dealing with a big problem later on 

Run Nightly Builds of your golden images or terraform plan as a warning signal to budget the time to improve for outage.
A nightly build is an automated workflow that occurs at night when developers are asleep.
If the build breaks because a change is required for the code, the developers will see this upon arrival in the morning and be able to budget accordingly.



## References to Values
## Function Calls
## Type Constraints
