4	Use Terraform outside of core workflow
4a	Describe when to use terraform import to import existing infrastructure into your Terraform state
4b	Use terraform state to view Terraform state
4c	Describe when to enable verbose logging and what the outcome/value is


----------------------------------------
## Drift
>How to detect configuration drift?
A compliance tool that can detect misconfiguration eg. AWS Config, Azure Policies, *GCP Security Health Analytics
Built-in support for drift detection eg. AWS CloudFormation Drift Detection
Storing the expected state eg. Terraform state files
How to correct configuration drift?
A compliance tool that can remediate (correct) misconfiguration e.g. AWS Config
• Terraform refresh and plan commands

Manually correcting the configuration (not recommended)
• Tearing down and setting up the infrastructure again
How to prevent configuration drift?
• Immutable infrastructure, always create and destroy, never reuse, Blue, Green deployment strategy.
• Servers are never modified after they are deployed
Baking AMI images or containers via AWS Image Builder or HashiCorp Packer, or a build server eg. GCP Cloud Run
Using GitOps to version control our laC, and peer review every single via Pull Requests change to infrastructure

### We can resolve Drift in three ways in Terraform:
---------------------
> Replacing Resources / Taint (DEPRECATED in v 0.152)
When a resource has become damaged or degraded that cannot be detected by Terraform we can use the <replace flag>
        <terraform apply -replace="aws_instance.example[0]">
        one resource at a time
Terraform Taint is used to mark a resource for replacement, the next time you run apply.
Why would want to mark a resource for replacement?
terraform taint aws_instance.my_web_app
A cloud resource can become degraded or damaged and you
want to return the expected resource to a healthy state
---------------------
> Importing Resources
When an approved manual addition of resource needs to be added to our state file We use the <import command>.
        <terraform import aws_instance.example i-abcd1234>
                                resource address      id
Steps:
1- define a placeholder for your imported resource in config files
2- you can leave the body blank and fill it after importing it
3- proceed with importing with above command

The command can only import one resource at a time.
Not all resources are importable, you need to check the bottom of resource documentation for suppc
---------------
> Refresh State
When an approved manual configuration of a resource has changed or removed
We use the <refresh-only flag> to reflect the changes in our state file

The terraform refresh command reads the current settings from all managed remote objects and updates the Terraform state to match.

The terraform refresh command is an alias for the refresh only and auto approve

<terraform refresh>  DEPRECATED
<terraform apply -refresh-only --auto-approve>


Terraform refresh will not modify your real remote objects, but it will modify the Terraform state.
Terraform refresh has been deprecated and with the refresh-only flag because it was not safe since it did not give you an opportunity to review proposed changes before updating state file

The —refresh-only flag for terraform plan or apply allows you to refresh and update your state file without making changes to your remote infrastructure.

> Scenario
Scenario
Imagine you create a terraform script that deploys a Virtual Machine on AWS You ask an engineer to terminate the server, and instead of updating the terraform script they mistakenly terminate the server via the AWS Console.
2 Options as Next Steps:
1) Either you run <terraform apply>   or
2) <terraform apply -refresh-only>

1) Either you run <terraform apply>
        Terraform will notice that the VM is missing
        Terraform will propose to create a new VM
        The State File is correct
        Changes the infrastructure to match state file
2) <terraform apply -refresh-only>
Terraform will notice that the VM you provisioned is missing.
With the refresh-only flag that the missing VM is intentional
Terraform will propose to delete VM from the state file
The State File is wrong
Changes the state file to match infrastructure