6	Use the core Terraform workflow
6a	Describe Terraform workflow ( Write -> Plan -> Create )
6b	Initialize a Terraform working directory (terraform init)
6c	Validate a Terraform configuration (terraform validate)
6d	Generate and review an execution plan for Terraform (terraform plan)
6e	Execute changes to infrastructure with Terraform (terraform apply)
6f	Destroy Terraform managed infrastructure (terraform destroy)
6g	Apply formatting and style adjustments to a configuration (terraform fmt)
----------------------------------------------
# Terraform Workflows
The core Terraform workflow has three steps:
1. Write - Author infrastructure as code.
2. Plan - Preview changes before applying.
3. Apply - Provision reproducible infrastructure.

As you team and requirements grow your workflow will evolve.
Lets look at what this workflow will look like for:
• Individual Practitioner (One person team)
• Teams using OSS
• Teams using Terraform Cloud

> Individual Practitioner (One person team)
• WRITE
- You write your Terraform configuration in your editor of choice
- You'll store your terraform code in a VCS e.g. Github
- You repeatedly run terraform plan and validate to find syntax errors.
- Tight feedback loop between editing code and running test commands
• PLAN
- When the developer is confident with their work in the write step  they commit their code to their local repository.
- They may be only using a single branch e.g. main
- Once their commit is written they'll proceed to apply
• APPLY
- They will run terraform apply and be prompted to review their plan
- After their final review they will approve the changes and await provisioning
- After a successful provision they will push their local commits to their remote repository.

> Team Workflow OSS (open source software)
• WRITE
- Each team members writes code locally on their machine in their editor of choice
- A team member will store their code to a branch in their code repository
    • Branches help avoid conflicts while a member is working on their code
    • Branches will allow an opportunity to resolve conflict during a merge into main
- Terraform plan can be used as a quick feedback loop for small teams
- For larger teams a concern over sensitive credentials becomes a concern.
    • A CI/CD process may be implemented so the burden of credentials is abstracted away
• PLAN
- When a branch is ready to be incorporated on Pull Request an Execution Plan can be
generated and displayed within the Pull Request for Review
• APPLY
- To apply the changes the merge needs to be approved and merged, which will kick of a code build server that will run terraform apply.
• DEVOPS ROLE
- The DevOps team has to setup and maintain their own CI/CD Pipeline
- They have to figure out how to store the state file e.g. Standard Backend remote state
- They are limited in their access controls (they can't be granular about what actions are allowed to performed by certain
members e.g. apply, destroy
- They have to figure out a way to safely store and inject secrets into their build server's runtime environment


> Teams using Terraform Cloud
• WRITE
- A team will use Terraform Cloud as their remote backend.
- Inputs Variables will be stored on Terraform Cloud instead of the local machines.
- Terraform Cloud integrates with your VCS to quickly setup a CI/CD pipeline
- A team member writes code to branch and commits per usual
• PLAN
- A pull request is create by a team member and Terraform Cloud will generate the speculative plan for review in the VCS. The member can also review and comment on the plan in Terraform Cloud.
• APPLY
- After the Pull request is merge Terraform Cloud runtime environment will perform a Terraform apply. A team member can Confirm and apply the changes.

Terraform Cloud streamlines a lot of the CI/CD effort, storing and securing sensitive credentials and makes it is easier to go back and audit the history of multiple runs.

> EXAM QUESTION:
given a scenario, which kind of workflow does it fit
----------------------------------------


> terraform init
terraform init initializes your terraform project by:
• Downloading plugin dependencies e.g. Providers and Modules
• Create a .terraform directory
• Create a dependency lock file to enforce expected versions for plugins and terraform itself.

Terraform init is generally the first command you will run for a new terraform project
If you modify or ghange dependencies run terraform init again to have it apply the changes
> terraform init -upgade
Upgrade all plugins to the latest version that
complies with the configuration's version
constraint
>terraform init -get-plugins-false
skip plugin installation
> terraform init -plugin-dir=PATH
force plugin installation to read plugins only from target directory
> terraform init —lockfile=MODE
set a dependency lockfile mode

Dependency lock file
.terraform.lock.hcl         <--init>
State lock file
.terraform.tfstate.lock.hcl <--apply>

> terraform get
terraform get command is used to download
and update modules in the root module.
When you're developer your own Terraform Modules
You may need to frequently pull updated modules but you do no want to initialize your state or pull new provider binaries.

Terraform Get is lightweight in this case
because it only updates modules.

In most cases you want to use terraform init, with the exception of local module development
> terraform plan
Terraform command creates an execution plan (aka Terraform Plan).
A plan consist Of:
• Reading the current state of any already-existing remote objects to make sure that the Terraform state is up-to-date.
• Comparing the current configuration to the prior state and noting any differences.
• Proposing a set of change actions that should, if applied, make the remote objects match the configuration.

A Terraform Plan file is binary file. If you open it up you'll just see machine code

> terraform apply -out=FILE
You can generate a saved plan file which you can then pass along to terraform apply. eg terraform apply FILE
When using save planed it will not prompt you to
confirm and will act like auto-approve

> terraform apply
.
|_ yes

devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/1-github$ terraform apply --auto-approve
Terraform apply command executes the actions proposed in an execution plan
2 Modes:

- Automatic Plan Mode
When you run terraform apply Executes plan, validate and the apply.
Requires users to manually approve the plan by writing "yes"
Terraform apply —auto-approve flag will automatically approve the plan.
- Saved Plan Mode
When you provide a filename to terraform to saved
plan file terraform apply FILE
performs exactly the steps specified by that plan file. It does not prompt for approval; if you want to inspect a plan file before applying it, you can use
> terraform show.

> terraform destroy
or terraform apply -destroy --auto-approve


> terraform destroy
> you can delete 1 resource at a time
resource "github_repository" "secondrepo" {
    name = "terraformRepo2"
    description = "my first resource with terraform"
    visibility = "public"
    auto_init = "true" #readme_file
}


devops@T480:~/terraform/resource/1-github$ terraform destroy --target github_repository.secondrepo
> terraform fmt 
--diff (what it would change)
> terraform validate
checks if your configuration is ok
Terraform Validate runs checks that verify whether a configuration is syntactically valid
and internally consistent, regardless of any provided variables or existing state
Validate is useful for general verification of reusable modules, including correctness of attribute names and value types

When you run terraform plan or terraform apply, validate will automatically be performed.


> terraform console 
interactive shell for evaluating terraform expressions before you apply them to your code