9	Understand Terraform Cloud capabilities
9a	Explain how Terraform Cloud helps to manage infrastructure
        Terraform Cloud overview
        Terraform Cloud Workflow
        Workspaces
9b	Describe how Terraform Cloud enables collaboration and governance
        Terraform Cloud Teams
        Sentinel

Terraform Cloud is an application that
helps teams use Terraform together.

# Features
- Manages your state files
- History of previous runs
- History of previous states
- Easy and secure variable injection
- Tagging
- Run Triggers (chaining workspaces)
- Specify any version of terraform per workspace
- Global state sharing
- Commenting on Runs
- Notifications via Webhooks, Email, Slack
- Organization and Workspace Level Permissions
- Policy as Code (via Sentinel Policy Sets)
- Single Sign On (SSO) (at Business tier)
- Cost Estimation (at Teams and Governance Tier)
- Integrations with ServiceNow, Splunk, K8, and custom Run Times

# Terms

> Organizations
An organization is a collection of workspaces
> Workspaces
A workspace belongs to an organization
A workspace represents a unique environment or stack.
> Teams
A team is composed of multiple members (users).
A team can be assigned to workspaces
> Runs
A run represents a single-run of the terraform run
environment that is operating on a execution plan.
Runs can be UI/VCS driven API driven or CLI driven



--------------------------------------
organization


    --------------------------------
    workspace - assigned to TeamA
        RUN - RUN - RUN
    --------------------------------

    --------------------------------
    workspace- assigned to TeamA&B
        RUN - RUN - RUN
    --------------------------------

    --------------------------------
    workspace- assigned to TeamB
        RUN - RUN - RUN
    --------------------------------

> Terraform Cloud Run Environment
When Terraform Cloud executes your terraform plan it runs them in its own Run Environment.

What is a Run Environment?
A run environment is Virtual Machine or container intended for the execution of code for specific runtime environment. A run environment is essentially a code build server.

The Terraform Cloud Run Environment is a single-use Linux machine running on the x86_64 architecture and the details of its internal implementation is not known.

Terraform Cloud will inject the following environment variables automatically on each run:

TFC_RUN_ID - a unique identifier for this run (e.g. "run-CKuwsxMGgMd3W7Ui").
TFC_WORKSPACE_NAME - name of the workspace used in this run
TFC_WORKSPACE_SLUG - full slug of the configuration used in this run org/workspace eg. "acme-corp/prod-load-balancers".
TFC_CONFIGURATION_VERSION_GIT_BRANCH - name of the branch used eg. "main"
TFC_CONFIGURATION_VERSION_GIT COMMIT SHA - full commit hash ofthe commit used
TFC_CONFIGURATION_VERSION_GIT_TAG - name of the git tag used eg. 1.1.0

These Env Vars can be accessed by defining a variable:
variable TFC_RUN_ID {}

> Terraform Cloud Agents

Terraform Cloud Agents is a paid feature of the Business plan to allow Terraform Cloud to communicate with isolated, private or on-premise infrastructure.
This is useful for on-premise infrastructure types such as vSphere, Nutanix, or OpenStack
The agent architecture is pull-based, so no inbound connectivity is required
Any agent you provision will poll Terraform Cloud for work and carry out execution of that work locally.

- Agents currently only support x86_64 bit Linux operating systems.
- You can also run the agent within Docker using the official Terraform Agent Docker container.
- Agents support Terraform versions 0.12 and above.
- System request at least 4GB of free disk space (for temporary local copies) and 2 GB of memory
- Needs access to make outbound requests on HTTPS (TCP Port 443) to

App.terraform.io
Registry.terraform.io
Releases.hashicorp.com
archivist.terraform.io
---------------------------------------


# Terraform Cloud Run Workflows

Terraform Cloud offers 3 types of Cloud Run Workflows
When you create a workspace you have to choose a workflow

> Version Control Workflow
Store your Terraform configuration in a git repository. and trigger runs based on pull requests and merges.

> CLI—driven workflow
Tngger remote Terraform runs from your local command line.

> API-driven workflow
A more advanced option. Integrate Terraform into a larger pipeline using the Terraform API


----------------------
> Version Control Workflow
    - UI/VCS Driven (User Interface and Version Control System)
    - Terraform Cloud is integrated with a specific branch in your VCS eg. Github via webhooks.
    - Whenever pull requests are submitted for the branch speculative plans are generated
    - Whenever a merge occurs to that branch, than a run is triggered on Terraform Cloud
> API-Driven (Application Programming Interface)
    - Workspaces are not directly associated with a VCS repo, and runs are not driven by webhooks on your VCS provider
    - A third-party tool or system will trigger runs via upload a configuration file via the Terraform Cloud API
    - The configuration file is a bash script that is packaged in an archive (.tar.gz). You are pushing a Configuration Version
> CLI-Driven (Command Line Interface)
    - Runs are triggered by the user running terraform CLI commands e.g. terraform apply and plan locally on their own machine.


> Terraform Cloud VCS Integration
Terraform Cloud can integrate with the following
Version Control Systems (VCS):
Github
Github (OAuth)
Github Enterprise
GitLab
GitLab EE and CE
Bitbucket Cloud
Bitbucket Server and Data Center
Azure DevOps Service
Azure DevOps Server
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Permissions
## Terraform Cloud - Organization-Level Permissions

> Organization-Level Permissions manage certain resources or settings across an org
- Manage Policies - create, edit, and delete the organization's Sentinel policies
- Manage Policy Overrides - override soft-mandatory policy checks.
- Manage Workspaces - create and administrate all workspaces within the organization
- Manage VCS Settings - set of VCS providers and SSH keys available within the org

> Organization Owners
Every organization has organization owner(s).
This is a special role that has every available permission and some actions only available to owners:
- Publish private modules
- Invite users to organization
- Manage team membership
- View all secret teams
- Manage organization permissions
- Manage all organization settings
- Manage organization billing
- Delete organization


## Terraform Cloud - Workspace-Level Permissions
Workspace-Level Permissions manage resource and settings for a specific workspace

> General Workspace Permissions
Granular permissions you can apply to a user via custom workspace permissions
- Read runs
- Queue plans
- Apply runs
- Lock and unlock workspaces
- Download sentinel mocks
- Read variable
- Read and write variables
- Read state outputs
- Read state versions
- Read and write state versions

> Fixed Permission Sets
Premade permissions for quick assignment.
`Read`
- Read runs
- Read variables
- Read state versions
`Plan`
- Queue Plans
- Read variables
- Read state versions
`Write`
- Apply runs
- Lock and unlock workspaces
- Download Sentinel mocks
- Read and write variables
- Read and write state versions

> Workspace Admins
A workspace admin is a special role that grants the all level of permissions and some workspace-admin-only permissions:
- Read and write workspace settings
- Set or remove workspace permissions of any team
- Delete workspace

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# API Tokens

Terraform Cloud supports three types of API Tokens. User, Team and Organization Tokens.
> Organization API Tokens
Have permissions across the entire organization
- Each organization can have one valid API token at a time
- Only organization owners can generate or revoke an organization's token.
- Organization API tokens are designed for creating and configuring workspaces and teams.
    - Not recommended as an all-purpose interface to Terraform Cloud
> Team API Tokens
allow access to the workspaces that the team has access to, without being tied to any specific user
- Each team can have one valid API token at a time
- Any member of a team can generate or revoke that team's token
- When a token is regenerated, the previous token immediately becomes invalid
- designed for performing API operations on workspaces.
- Same access level to the workspaces the team has access to
> User API Tokens
- Most flexible token type because they inherit permissions from the user they are associated with
- Could be for a real user or a machine user.
- user API token is generated when you log in


### API Tokens Access Levels
chart avl on web


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Terraform Cloud - Private Registry
Terraform Cloud allows you to publish private modules for your Organization within the Terraform Cloud Private Registry
Terraform Cloud's private module registry helps you share Terraform modules across your organization.
It includes support for:
• module versioning
• a searchable and filterable list of available modules
• a configuration designer
All users in your organization can view your private module registry.
> Authentication
You can use either a user token or a team token for authentication, but the type of token you choose may grant different permissions.
- Using terraform login will obtain a user token
- To use a team token you'll need to manually set it your terraform CLI configuration file

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Terraform Cloud — Cost Estimation
Cost Estimation is a feature to get a monthly cost of resources display along side your runs. Cost Estimation is available with Teams and Governance plan and above

Cost Estimation is only for specific cloud resources for AWS, Azure and GCP.
You can could use a Sentinel Policy to assert the expectation that resource are under a particular cost.

-------------------------------------
## Terraform Cloud — Workflow Options

You can choose any version of Terraform
for a Workspace

You can choose to share state globally
across your organization

You can choose to auto approve
runs (skip manual approval)

--------------------------------------
## Migrating Default Local State to Cloud

To migrate a local Terraform project that only uses the default workspace to Terraform Cloud

Create a workspace in Terraform Cloud
Replace your Terraform Configuration
with a remote backend.

terraform {}   ---> change to

terraform {
    backend "remote" {
        hostname = "app.terraform.io"
        organization = "my-app"
        workspaces {
            name = "my-wspace"
        }

    }
}



Run terraform init, and copy the
existing state by typing "yes"

Do you want to copy existing state to the new backend?
Pre-existing state was found while migrating the previous "local" backend to the newly configured "remote" backend. No existing state was found in the newly configured "remote" backend. Do you want to copy this state to the new "remote" backend? Enter "yes" to copy and "no" to start with an empty state.

-----------------------------------
# Terraform Enterprize
## Terraform Enterprize Requirements
> Operational mode: - how data should be stored
- External Services
• Postgres
• and AWS S3 Bucket, GCP Cloud Storge Bucket or Azure Blob Storage or Minio Object Storage
- Mounted Disk — stores data in a separate directory on a host intended for an external disk e.g. EBS, iSCSI
- Demo — Stores all the data on the instance, data can be backed up with snapshots, not recommend for production use
> Credentials — 
- Ensure you have credentials to use Enterprise and have Secure connection
- Terraform Enterprise License —You obtain a license form HashiCorp
- TLS Certificate and Private Key — You need to prove you're your own TLS Certificate

> Supported OS
Debian 7.7+
Ubuntu
RedHat 
CentOS
Amazon Linux
Oracle Linux

> Hardware Requirements
At least 10GB of disk space on the root volume
At least 40GB of disk space for the Docker data
directory (defaults to /var/lib/docker)
At least 8GB of system memory
At least 4 CPU cores


## Air Gapped Environments
What is Air Gap?
Air Gap or disconnected network is a network security measure employed on one or more computers to
ensure that a secure computer network is physically isolated from unsecure networks e.g. Public Internet

No internet. No outside connectivity
Industries in the Public Sector (e.g. government, military) or large enterprise e.g. Finance and Energy often employ air gap networks.
HashiCorp Terraform Enterprise supports an
installation type for Air Gapped Environments

To install or update Terraform Enterprise you will supply an "air gap bundle" which is an archive of a Terraform Enterprise release version
-------------------------------------------------------------
# Terraform Cloud Features and Pricing


availability of features as per plan

Open-Source software       ----------------Cloud-------------------------                          Self-hosted
                           |                |                           |                               |
                        `Free`       `Team / Teams and Governance`      `Business`           `Enterprise (self-hosted)`
laC, Workspaces, Variables, Runs, Resource Graph, Providers, Modules, Public Module Registry
                        Remote State, VCS Connection, Workspace Mgmt., Secure Variable Storage, Remote Runs, Private Module Registry
                                     Team Management, Sentinel Policy as Code Management, Cost Estimation    
                                                                Single Sign On (SSO), Audit Logging
                                                                Self Hosted Agents
                                                                Configuration Designer, ServiceNow Integration
                    1 current run      2 current runs           Unlimited Current Runs
<Local CLI------------> <l-----------------Cloud------------------------------------> <l-----------------------Private------->
<Community-----------------------------> <l-----------------Bronze------------------> <l------------------Silver, Gold------->
                        $0 upto 5 users     $20teams   $70teams&gov


-------------------------------------------------------------
# Workspaces
Workplaces allows you to manage multiple environments or alternate state files.
eg. Development, Production
There are two variants of workspaces:
• CLI Workspaces —A way of managing alternate state files (locally or via remote backends)
• Terraform Cloud Workspaces — acts like completely separate working directories

Think of workspaces as being similar to having different branches in a git repository
Workspaces are technically equivalent to renaming your state file
By default, you already have a single workspace
in your local backend called default

> Local State
Terraform stores the workspace states
in a folder called terraform.tfstate.d

> Remote State
The workspace files are stored directly in
the configured backend.

A Terraform configuration has a backend that:
defines how operations are executed
• where persistent data is stored e.g. Terraform State

Certain backends support multiple named workspaces
• allowing multiple states to be associated with a single configuration.
The configuration still has only one backend, but multiple distinct instances of
that configuration to be deployed without configuring a new backend or
changing authentication credentials.


# Terraform Cloud Run Triggers
Terraform Cloud provides a way to connect your workspace to one or more workspaces
via Run Triggers within your organization, known as "source workspaces".

> Run Triggers
allow runs to queue automatically in your workspace on successful apply of runs in any of the source workspaces.
You can connect each workspace to up to 20 source workspaces.

Run triggers are designed for workspaces that rely on information or infrastructure produced by other workspaces.
If a Terraform configuration uses data sources to read values that might be changed by another
workspace, run triggers let you explicitly specify the external dependency.